[Music]
We have been struggling with high
nitrate levels in our source water.
>> It could be farm runoff, fertilization,
number of things.
Nearly every Iowa county in the Hawkeye
state is battling against manure being
released into their water. 11.12
that is over the limit. Treatment plants
across central Iowa are having a hard
time treating it. We have what was at
one time the largest nitrate removal
facility in the world. And
unfortunately, even that wasn't able to
keep up with the level of nitrate that
we're seeing in the rivers.
>> We have beaches in Iowa, but they're
closed. They have algae. They have
bacteria.
>> The lake, it's it's really showing up
green right now. It's really sad.
>> Nitrogen pollution is a big problem in
Iowa. It's dangerous for people and for
the environment, but there's also a
whole other side of this story that's
frankly more troubling. It's about the
big and powerful vested interests who
have really allowed the contamination on
such a wide scale.
>> I don't think it would be a surprise to
anyone that there's pressure on
legislators and government officials
from special interest groups. The status
quo in Iowa is working for some people
and not working well at all for many
others.
I think in ' 07 we were made aware that
our nitri levels were higher than
normal.
Everybody is connected to a farmer.
Everybody is connected with somebody who
has had cancer. I'd say four or five
people for sure. Everybody knows that
amount who have died of cancer. And it's
it's becoming
creepy.
I'm Steve Pick. I'm in Remson, Iowa. I'm
67 years old and I've been here most of
my life. I was a city clerk in utilities
for about 34 years. There has to be some
correlation between nitrate levels and
cancer.
Iowa's cancer rate has been climbing in
near lock step with the rising use of
nitrogen on farms for decades.
Scientists though aren't sure if the
correlation is positive or merely
coincidental. What we do know is that
age adjusted Iowa has the nation's
fastest growing and second highest
cancer rate overall after Kentucky and
is one of only two states in the US
where the cancer rate is still growing
at all.
Iowa used to be sort of this marshy
swamp land and to make it as productive
as we have we've essentially plumbed a
lot of our fields so that we can get the
water off the land and make the the land
more immunable to crop production.
Iowa is really among the most heavily
modified landscapes in the entire
country. Starting with European
settlers, it was literally carved up
into squares for individual farming
families.
With the endless green fields, it's hard
to see how farming in Iowa could have a
negative impact. But if you look a
little closer, you realize it's like any
other major industry driven by market
forces entirely indifferent to
ecological and human health. Most of
what is grown goes into animal feed and
ethanol for fuel.
Corn yields have risen enormously in the
last 50 years.
To achieve that productivity, the
state's farmers spread nearly 4 billion
pounds of nitrogen from fertilizer and
manure on Iowa's 13 million acres of
corn every year.
Many in the scientific community are
worried.
This is essentially our like sample
intake lab.
So those are treated seeds. That's how
we do agriculture these days. And that
seed is colorful because it's painted
with pesticides. We spray on there an
insecticide, a fungicide, maybe an
amaticide. And this is something we
spent a lot of time studying. These
coatings, once the seed goes in the
ground, if there's rainfall, these do
get washed away. Farmers just will buy
what they're being sold. this is what
their local representative will say is
this is your seed for this year and
they'll just use it. There are
challenges when it comes to water
quality and I think concerns over the
challenges that might be there for
public health as well.
>> This is our well field here that
supplies our water.
>> We had one bad well. Well number eight
was extremely high.
To get the nitrate out of the water,
Steve Pik organized the community of
Rimson, raising hundreds of thousands of
dollars to buy almost a hundred acres of
farmland above the wellfield.
They replaced the rows of corn and
soybeans that were growing there with
native prairie grasses, and the deep
roots of those grasses successfully
absorbed much of the pollution. Steve
Pic won a clean water award as nitrate
levels in Remson's wells plummeted about
40% in just a few years. But then it was
all cut down.
$15,000 worth of seed of of planting all
this and wild flowers
to be just thrown away to be sprayed.
You know, it's pretty disheartening.
[Music]
Starting in 2010, more conservative
politicians came into power across the
state and the project was effectively
killed. Steve Pik was fired in 2012. A
few years later, in 2015, nitrate levels
had shot back up. This is when the story
gets really interesting.
Iowa's Department of Natural Resources
sent a scientist to investigate the
rising levels of nitrate in Remson. That
investigator identified the Tentinger
cattle feed lot on the edge of town as
the source of the pollution.
It comes from there down through this
creek down that way between the ball
fields and then weaves through town
through Beck Park and eventually ends up
in our whalefield.
Emails show that the DNR's chief of
compliance at the time, Barbara Lynch,
closed the investigation to avoid
political blowback. DNR records show
residents repeatedly complained about
the farm's manure flowing through town,
but state investigations were shut down
at least twice. By 2017, Remson's
shallow wells were so filled with
nitrate they had to actually be turned
off. Remson now has a $10 million water
plant to treat deeper wells and much
higher water bills.
Nobody really questions it at all. They
just live with it.
[Music]
Political interference like that is not
unusual in Iowa. In fact, what happened
in Remson was a microcosm of how
agricultural interests wield
extraordinary power over the Department
of Natural Resources and other state
institutions to protect the A industry,
endangering public health.
I'm Claire Ruby. I work for the
Department of Environmental Science and
Sustainability here at Drake. For 20
years before that, I worked for the
Department of Natural Resources um of
Iowa.
>> In 2019,
Claire Ruby co-wrote a research paper
that was led by Chris Jones of the
University of Iowa.
>> The 2019 paper. Oh boy.
That report examined the waterways
around Remson in northwest Iowa where
livestock feed lots have proliferated in
recent decades alongside a leap in crop
farming. Nitrate is a byproduct of both.
What the paper showed was that there was
a doubling of nutrient application in
those wersheds leading to significantly
higher nitrate concentrations in the
surface water. It's completely
unnecessary. Folks aren't just applying
what is needed to grow those crops. I
discovered that there was a a meeting
about this with a number of the powerful
egg players. I looked through the door
and I saw on the screen um a PowerPoint
that talked about activist scientists
and things really went downhill after
that.
>> At that meeting was a group called the
Iowa Farm Bureau
>> advocating for family farms on issues
raised by local farmers. The Iowa Farm
Bureau fits the true definition of a
grassroots movement.
The Iowa Farm Bureau projects a
wholesome image, but essentially it's a
lobbying machine for the big a
businesses in Iowa. These guys don't
look exactly like the typical farmer.
Established in 1918, the Iowa Farm
Bureau includes all kinds of investors
and bankers and lawyers and goes far
beyond farmers. It has unusually deep
pockets for an industry trade group as
well, thanks to corporate profits that
it earns from an insurance subsidiary
that's very large. The IFB is so
influential that it was able to insert
entire passages from its own
publications without any citation into
an early draft of the Iowa Nutrient
Reduction Strategy, the state's
voluntary blueprint for reducing
nitrogen and phosphorus emissions. This
regulationfree rulebook is what allows
the agricultural industry to operate on
a volume imperative. The system involves
farmers who are incentivized to maximize
harvest by huge demand for livestock
feed and also the federal mandate to
turn corn into ethanol for auto fuel.
The federal government basically
indemnifies them against losses by
subsidizing crop insurance.
[Music]
I worked about 20 years for the Iowa
Farm Bureau as the director of research
and commodity services. I was quite
involved with uh some of the discussions
on the Iowa nutrient reduction strategy.
It's really just how much nitrogen do we
need to grow a bushel of corn. Right now
in Iowa, we do about one pound of
nitrogen per bushel of corn. That's
highly efficient. 1980 we were a pound
and a half of nitrogen.
Nitrogen is the most expensive input I
have on this farm. I don't want to waste
it. Now, could it be done more
efficiently?
Theoretically, yes.
Applying blanket fertilizer has become
the norm for modern farming systems, but
some believe there are better and
cleaner ways to do it. Iowa State
University aronomy professor Matt Leeman
founded and ran the Marsden Farm Project
from 2002 until retiring just a couple
years ago.
If you look at what's down below the
oats here, you can see alalfa plants
that were planted at the same time as
the oats. So corn likes to grow after
alalfa. And you can grow that corn with
less fertilizer after alalfa because
roots can move more quickly through the
soil to greater depth and explore the
soil for more water and nutrients.
Leeman proved that by rotating corn and
soybean with alfalfa and grains such as
oats, farmers could actually earn more
money while using 85% less nitrogen
fertilizer.
>> The principles and practices that you're
seeing out here are well known. For
decades, for centuries,
most farmers have been moved toward a
financial situation where they're trying
to maximize their gross revenue. And if
they find shortfalls in their profit
because input costs are high or market
values are low, the government through
your subsidized insurance helps them
maintain profitability
because we don't assign a cost for
externalities for what happens downwind,
downstream, and downhill. The production
economics favor the high use of inputs
and the high use of farming practices
that don't necessarily translate into
good environmental and human health
outcomes.
[Music]
Some folks will say regulation is the
way, but regulation is a real dirty word
here in Iowa. And you know, folks don't
want to have that conversation. I am not
blaming farmers. This is the system as
it stands. This is what in the US we
call a food production system.
>> I would argue the Farm Bureau system is
the envy of the world relative to
getting quality agricultural input and
involvement of producers in egg
production policy. And so when we talk
about regulations,
no, I'm a fan of set out voluntary
guidelines and make sure this system
rewards sound economics.
The Iowa Farm Bureau has been
campaigning for years to be sure that
farmers do not have to follow strict
regulations that has allowed
environmental policies to remain
secondary to economics in the state.
Lobbying records in the state
legislature show the IFB has
consistently opposed and tried to repeal
any measures that could take up farmland
for other purposes such as solar panels
and environmental restoration.
[Music]
While big a prefers to maintain the
status quo, new science suggests a
rethink might be wise.
>> There's been some concern that maybe
that 10 milligs per liter standard is
not health protective enough. And
there's been plenty of science that has
started to find associations between
nitrate and drinking water and chronic
health impacts like bladder cancer,
colurectal cancer, thyroid cancer, and
birth defects. So, here in Iowa, we've
got communities that are routinely
drinking levels of nitrate where people
are wondering, is this truly safe even
though the EPA tells us it's below the
standard. Back in 2010, the EPA
acknowledged that there was new data
around nitrate and chronic health
effects that suggested that they needed
a new health assessment. But here we are
in 2025 and we have not completed that
health assessment.
Today, I'm pleased to make the largest
deregulatory announcement in US history.
For years, federal environmental laws
and the US Environmental Protection
Agency have really stood in as nature's
last line of defense in Iowa and
elsewhere. Now though, the current
administration wants to disband EPA's
science and research division, the only
branch that does these risk assessments.
as President Trump seeks to slash EPA's
budget by more than half.
>> What happens downstream of us, this just
kind of keeps continuing and continuing
and continuing all the way to the Gulf
really where you see the hypoxia zone.
This is a whole interconnected system.
This is not isolated to us. Why do the
fish kills keep happening? It's death by
a thousand cuts. We just keep doing this
over and over. So, it's not just a
drinking water problem. It's an
ecosystem problem, but we've gotten used
to it. It starts to feel normal.
[Music]
>> Seems like the bigger the operations
around here get, the more they're
reliant on chemicals. I'd like to see a
happy medium in in there, but it seems
like it's it's just going way too far
out of whack.
Looks pretty clear, but I still wouldn't
drink it.
[Music]